
November 17 2020 - With mental health making a move to the forefront of healthcare and government investment, there's more acceptance than ever before when it comes to speaking about those internal struggles.

More than 45 per cent of people are predicted to have depression at one point in their lives, and more than 2 million suffer from anxiety at any given moment. That said, mental health problems affect quite literally millions of us, but there are a few things you can do to help regulate your feelings and push for a happier life.

One of those things is ensuring you're focusing on a nightly wind down and getting a good night's sleep. When we're sleeping poorly, we don't get the time to shut off or reset, and this keeps us in a stressed and anxious state - something we should all work to combat.

To learn a little more about sleep and mental health, and what you can do about it, take a look below.

Dealing with Poor Sleep
Two of the critical factors that affect our sleep are lifestyle choices and sleeping disorders like sleep apnea.

When it comes to sleep apnea, for example, we may be getting our allotted nine hours of sleep, though due to the constant wakes and breathing difficulties, our bodies aren't able to fall asleep properly.

This, as a result, prevents the much-needed refresh or reset that's imperative to maintaining happiness levels. Combatting this can typically be as simple as investing in a CPAP machine, which keeps the airways open and enables a good night's sleep without constant wakeups.

For lifestyle choices, consuming alcohol, coffee and using other stimulants and smartphones before bed is also going to affect the mind's ability to unwind, which will damage your mental health.

As you may already know, alcohol prevents quality sleep, as does caffeine. You may be asleep, though the process of REM sleep (the sleep needed to consolidate memory and regulate hormones, etc.) is prevented almost entirely. The next day you may feel rested, at least physically, though your mental health remains at risk of deteriorating.

Below we'll look at a few of the issues associated with poor sleep.

The Mind Slows Down

An effect of poor sleep that has a knock-on effect for everyday life is the slowdown of the mind.

You'll be a lot less alert and not have the ability to focus or problem-solve when you're not sleeping well - and this fosters a feeling of doing poorly at work and school. If you're tired, sluggish and poorly performing, you're more likely to see yourself in a negative light, which spirals us into being more self-critical and pessimistic.

Sleep studies have shown that not only does this have an impact on happiness levels, it also reduces mental agility and overall intelligence.

You're at Risk of Memory Loss

Another significant negative to poor sleep is memory loss or the ability to recall important information.

Whether this is linked to depression directly is still debated; however, when we're unable to pull upon memories in crucial moments throughout the day, this relates to feelings of self resentment. Again, affecting how we perceive ourselves and increasing the risks of depression.

Stress is Majorly Increased

As we mentioned at the start of the article, we're unable to genuinely shut off and unwind when we're not sleeping, increasing stress hormones in the body.

That in mind, the day after a poor night's sleep will be a lot more 'tense' in a sense, which keeps us on edge. We're less alert, unable to draw on important information when we're asked and we're also at risk of injury.

Essentially, we're less confident, more self-critical and tenser when we're tired - and as a result, at a higher risk of depression and anxiety. Research puts people with poor sleep habits at five times more likely to develop depression.

Lack of Mental Clarity and Reduced Happiness

One final thing to note is that with little time to reset the brain's chemical and emotional balance, you're leaving yourself open to being less happy and more disoriented in the day ahead.

When there isn't a whole unwind and 'reset' of the brain's chemicals, there's an increased chance of your happiness being reduced. You'll be unable to be your refreshed and resilient self, and more likely to be affected by the negatives in the day and unable to manage the feelings of stress and anxiety.


Popular Psychological Theories on Work Motivation
By Andrej Kovacevic
October 2020 - The world is full of flash-in-the-pan theories that work for a very short space of time, and then fade out of existence as they become less and less useful. Yet, there are clearly many people who are highly motivated in their careers without really truly understanding why, so we should try to figure out what motivates some people to work harder than others.

The search for a secret, or the "Key to success" is a fool's errand. There is no single secret, and that is the primary take-away from this article. Each theory in this article is just as right and applicable as the last, since there is no single answer to psychology of work motivation.

Maslow's Theory of the Hierarchy of Needs
Abraham Maslow puts forward the idea that satisfied needs do not motivate. The idea is that if you have certain needs and desires, then said desires may motivate you to action, even if the action will not fulfill your desire or need.

As a contradictory point, this theory plays into what hack motivationalists say in how you have to be uncomfortable in order to remain motivated. The fact is that very happy and very satisfied people can be highly motivated at work and may in fact work better if they are happy and satisfied. Yet, other people are motivated by a sexual desire, ambitious desire, and sometimes by the fear of poverty to the point where their desire is what motivates them to work so hard.

Read more about Maslow here.

Maxwell's Beat The Grind Theory
Ashley Maxwell's theory is based on the idea that motivation is not something you create or stoke, but is something that you manage over a long period of time. Motivation at work is not something that is inspired by quotes, or through affirmations, or through positivity. Instead, motivation is managed more like a steam train - not getting to hot, too cold, not overworking, not coasting, and so forth.

This sits in contradiction to prolific workers who seem to do their best work during manic episodes, and then burn out for however long before starting the process again. On the other hand, there are many jobs where high peaks and deep troughs are not possible, so the notion that you manage your motivation in the same way you may manage your weight, is not without its merits.

Read more about the Grind Theory here.

Alderfer's Existence (E), Relatedness (R), and Growth (G) Theory
Clayton Paul Alderfer took the Maslow Hierarchy Model and changed it with the notion that if you satisfy your lower needs, then your higher tier needs become more powerful. In other words, a hungry, horny, sleepy, thirsty, lonely person is less likely to feel motivated at work.

This stands in stark contradiction to the many times we have seen highly motivated workers in developing countries achieve massive amounts while most of their lower needs are unfulfilled. Yet, even common sense says that somebody who is lonely, hungry, sleepy, etc., is going to be a more distracted and less motivated worker under most circumstances.

Read more about ERG here.

Hanin's Optimal Functioning Hypothesis
Yuri Hanin's work is often unfairly pigeonholed into essays about sports motivation. The optimal/optimum functioning hypothesis claims there is an inverted U arousal-performance relationship, which also applies to anxiety-performance, desire-performance, enthusiasm-performance, and so forth.

Let's use an enthusiasm-performance example. Let's say you could measure something like your enthusiasm for a job, where 1 is very unenthusiastic, and 10 is hyper-enthusiastic. Hanin claims that an enthusiasm level of 5 is the best, claiming you would perform best at 5 for the longest period of time. The idea is that nearer number 1 would be too unmotivated, and nearer 10 would be so motivated that you would burn out quickly and stall.

Contradicting this theory is the fact that no matter how aroused you are, how much desire you have, how much anxiety you feel, etc., it is often impossible to maintain such emotions over the long term. Asking people to keep it at "5" would be no different than asking people to "Not" be hungry when they haven't eaten.

Yet, the Yerkes-Dodson law seems correct when it states that people with higher anxiety/desire/enthusiasm/etc., are less likely to perform well at complicated tasks. Ergo, aiming to temper your feelings into a middle ground area is probably your best bet if you want long-term motivation and productivity.

Read more about Hanin here.

Final Thoughts - Contradiction After Contradiction
"Reinforcement theory," based on Skinner's operant conditioning theory was left out of this article, not because it is wrong (though it may be), but because positive reinforcement is not in your hands, it is in the hands of your employer. The theories noted in this article are all ones you can use to affect your own work motivation, whereas the reinforcement theory is not something you can control in order to affect your motivation.

Do not be afraid to take a few mental health courses in which you may learn about how self-determination and a feeling of control contributes to a healthier state of mind. The very fact that you are free to determine your motivation may be a motivating factor in itself. Learn a little about mental health, and you will also see that people who feel they have no control will often slip into a depressive state, which is often fraught with motivation problems.

A key point made in this article was to point out how each theory is both right and wrong. So, the key take-away from this article is that if you hold true to a single motivational theory, then you are probably just as right as you are wrong. The best thing you can do is to learn more about the theories behind work motivation, and learn a little more about mental health, since it also plays a big role in a person's motivation.